ADR: REST API Guidelines (#12544)
Unleash/unleash: contributing/ADRs/back-end/rest-api-guidelines.md

---
title: "ADR: REST API Guidelines"
---

## Background

> This ADR captures the conventions we want new endpoints to follow. It applies to new work. Reshaping an existing endpoint is a breaking change for its consumers, so bringing an older endpoint into line usually means shipping a new endpoint alongside it and deprecating the old one.

Reviewer: I think I'd frame this a bit differently. Creating a new endpoint should probably be the last resort rather than the usual way of bringing an existing endpoint closer to these guidelines.

Every new public endpoint is another contract we potentially need to maintain/deprecate for a long time, and removing an existing one is intentionally expensive. We even have OpenAPI diff tooling to surface API changes.

I'd rather say something like: these guidelines apply to new endpoints, but don't create a replacement endpoint just to make an existing one conform. First consider whether the existing API can support the use case without a breaking change; introduce a new endpoint when there is a meaningful new resource/use case or when the compatibility constraint actually requires it.

But I know this also creates friction with this ADR, cause it's unclear what to do if there's an existing endpoint which is UI only... I don't personally like that type of friction. Right now the paragraph feels like: "if old API doesn't match the guideline → make another API" and this adds a lot of cost upfront.

Author: I like the addition of checking if existing endpoint can be extended safely. 
But a breaking change int he API is usually worse than creating a new endpoint and immediately deprecating the existing one. If something was returning a plain array `[]` there isn't much that can be done.

Reviewer: Agree, a breaking change like stop returning an array does require another endpoint... it can't be done otherwise, but it feels this should be the exception more than the rule.

For request-body conventions (handling `undefined` vs `null` on POST/PUT), see [POST/PUT API payload](/contributing/ADRs/back-end/POST-PUT-api-payload). For response-schema precision, see [Separation of request and response schemas](/contributing/ADRs/overarching/separation-request-response-schemas).

## Decision

General guidelines for new API endpoints. It's fine to do something different if your requirements are not typical, but it's what most new endpoints should default to.

### URL structure

Pick the prefix that matches the audience of the new endpoint

* `/api/client` — server SDKs evaluating flags. Public, stable.
* `/api/frontend` — browser SDKs evaluating flags. Public, stable.
* `/edge` — Unleash Edge.
* `/api/integration/*` — new integrations.

> * `/api/ui` — new UI-only endpoints.

Reviewer: You know I'm a bit worried about binding audience strongly to the URL.

This is actually one of the things we debated in #11264: audience and URL structure are separate concerns. The nice property of audience metadata is that an endpoint can start as UI-oriented and later become useful to integrations/public consumers without us needing to move it to another route and carry another endpoint/deprecation with us.

My biggest concern with /api/ui is that something that is "UI-only" today stops being UI-only tomorrow. At that point we're either stuck with a public API living under /api/ui, or we create another endpoint under another prefix and pay the migration cost. Or we end up maintaining two similar-purpose APIs.

I'd prefer URL structure to describe the API/resource boundary unless we have a strong reason for architectural isolation, and audience to describe who we currently intend to consume it. Otherwise, URL path overlaps 2 requirements or reasons for change: one is resource and the other one is audience.

* `/api/admin` — documented public API.

Other prefixes exist for context, but new endpoints should not add to them:

* `/api/signal-endpoint` — external webhooks calling into Unleash (integration).
* `/scim` — SCIM 2.0 user provisioning (integration).
* `/health`, `/ready`, `/internal-backstage` — operational endpoints for orchestrators and monitoring.
* `/auth/*`, `/invite`, `/logout`, `/feedback` — public browser flows.

Stability within any prefix is signalled by the `release: { alpha | beta | stable }` field — alpha endpoints are hidden from public docs. See [API Version Tracking and Stability Lifecycle](/contributing/ADRs/back-end/api-version-tracking). Prefix says who the endpoint is for; `release` says how stable it is.

> Prefer purpose-built endpoints for specific UI needs over stretching a generic endpoint with a narrow filter. A dedicated endpoint documents intent, keeps its response shape minimal, and can be optimized independently. See [Write model vs Read models](/contributing/ADRs/back-end/write-model-vs-read-models) for the internal read/write split this endpoint pattern reflects.

Reviewer: I'm not sure we should make a new endpoint the preferred solution here. A dedicated read model internally makes a lot of sense, but I don't think that necessarily needs to imply a dedicated HTTP endpoint.

Given the lifecycle cost of adding API surface, I'd reverse the default: first see whether the use case fits naturally into an existing resource using filtering/projection/etc.; introduce a purpose-built endpoint when the semantics, performance characteristics or response model are genuinely different enough to justify a separate contract.

Otherwise I worry we'll optimize locally for a slightly cleaner implementation/response and accumulate API surface that is expensive to evolve later. I'd be ok, if this is only true for `/api/ui`... which now that I think about it, is maybe where we should focus this ADR... treating `/api/ui` as a special path where we don't provide backward compatibility guarantees as we do in other paths.

> ### Shadowing dynamic path segments

Author: This whole section is new. Original version had just "Stop using shadowing." part, but didn't give us any ideas what to do instead. Maybe it won't be too hard to discuss here.

Reviewer: I agree with avoiding shadowing, but documentation alone doesn't protects us very well. When adding `/projects/foo`, it's quite hard for the developer to know that somewhere else `/projects/:projectId` exists, especially once routes live in different controllers.

Could we make this mechanically detectable instead?

For example, we could add a route lint/test that compares registered routes and flags if you're shadowing an existing route.

Author: I'm ok with you creating a project for it. If I try solving it now, I won't close this PR this year :D

* Use `kebab-case` for the static parts e.g.: 
  * `/api/admin/release-plan-templates`
  * `/api/admin/projects/default/environments/${environment}/change-requests`
* Use `camelCase` for query string parameters e.g.:
  * `strategyId`
  * `variantForFlag`
* Use `camelCase` for response body fields e.g.:
  * `hasMore`
  * `flagCreators`

### List response shape

* Return an object envelope, not a bare array:

```json
{
    "items": [ ... ]
}
```
* This makes it easier to extend the response without breaking the API. E.g.: to add pagination metadata (`total`, `hasMore`, cursors).

```json
{
    "total": 2000,
    "items": [ ... ]
}
```
* Name the collection field after the resource (`users`, `flagCreators`, `events`) rather than a generic `data`. It reads better at call sites and matches existing endpoints.
* New list endpoints should have a `limit` by default. 
  * While adding `limit` it usually makes sense to add [Pagination](#pagination).
  * But, if you're not adding pagination (even though you should) then think of some other way to get the data beyond the limit — see [Query parameter conventions](#query-parameter-conventions) for the standard sort and filter names.

> * Endpoints should set a `maxLimit`. Always return the applied `total`, `limit`, and `offset` in the response — even when the caller did not paginate — so the envelope stays consistent and callers can see what was actually used. E.g.: a request for `limit=10000000` may still return max `1000` items.

Author: This is now a little more enforcing. I think it's fine as I add a disclaimer at the beginning that you can do other things if you have a good reason, but let me know if you disagree.

```json
{
    "total": 2000,
    "limit": 1000,
    "offset": 0,
    "items": [ ... ]
}
```

### Pagination

* Because new list endpoints should have a `limit` by default, users need some way of getting values past the limit e.g.: `Load more` or see `page 2` of the data. 
* New list endpoints should paginate by default. It is much cheaper to opt in from day one than to retrofit an endpoint whose clients rely on receiving the full list in one call.

> * Default to offset/limit with `?offset=` and `?limit=`, and include `total` in the response so the UI can render counts and page controls.

Reviewer: Do we want to require total?

Pagination itself can be cheap while an exact total is expensive, because it can require a second count query over the complete filtered result set. Some UIs only need to know whether there's another page.

I'd make total part of the contract when the caller actually needs an exact count, rather than requiring it for every paginated endpoint. hasMore / fetching limit + 1 is often significantly cheaper and still supports "load more".

Author: I'm not saying that we require that. I say "default to" and I want to imply to use `total` when it makes sense. "next page" style of navigation is not a trivial pick and requires different UI and UX. 

I agree that sometimes it makes sense to move `total` to a separate endpoint or to give up on it entirely, but for most things it's fine and we already have a UX/UI patterns for offset based pagination with total (e.g.: in Events).

* Choose cursor-based pagination (`?cursor=` + `hasMore`) only when stability across pages matters more than a known `total` — for example, endpoints served from a rapidly changing feed.

> * Do not skip pagination because "the list will be short". Instances vary; assumptions about size that hold for one customer routinely fail for another. Response size is not always the limiting factor; sometimes DB load may force us to introduce a limit. 

Reviewer: I think this is too absolute. There are resources whose cardinality is structurally bounded and intentionally small, rather than merely "usually small". Feature strategy types would be an example.

Requiring pagination there adds API/schema/query/UI complexity without buying us much, which works against our preference for shipping the simplest thing that solves the problem.

Could the rule instead be something like: paginate collections whose cardinality is unbounded/customer-controlled or whose query/response cost can materially grow. For collections with a small domain-defined upper bound, returning the complete list is fine.

And ideally pagination should be cheap to opt into through shared helpers, so choosing it doesn't mean every endpoint independently implements limit, offset, schemas, response metadata, etc.

### Query parameter conventions

Reuse existing names before inventing new ones:

* `?q=` — free-text search across the natural user-visible fields (typically name/username/email for user-shaped endpoints). Do not require a minimum length; an empty `q` should behave the same as omitting it.
* `?offset=` / `?limit=` — pagination controls.
* `?sortBy=` / `?sortOrder=asc|desc` — sorting. Each endpoint documents its allowed `sortBy` values and its default; `sortOrder` defaults to `asc`.
* `?field=IS:value` — field-specific filters via the shared generic-query-params helper. Prefer this over one-off boolean flags or bespoke parameter names.

### Return only what the caller needs

Design the response shape for the specific use case. Do not return the full internal model on the theory that clients can "just pick what they want". It's way harder to remove problematic fields than add them when needed.

> Every field adds wire cost and couples the client to the internal shape. If the UI does not render a field, do not return it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Every field adds wire cost and couples the client to the internal shape. If the intended consumer does not need a field, do not return it.
```
